Before you get your P-Plates it's a good
idea to practice driving in the country
with your qualified supervising driver.
Driving in the country is different from
driving in the city and suburbs,
it needs an entirely different approach.
Country driving may appear easier;
there are fewer traffic lights
turns and cars on the road, but this
can cause people to become less aware
and alert. Don't fall into this trap. For
this reason
country driving is much more dangerous.
You're driving in higher speeds, then you need to
concentrate a lot more. What differences
do you find driving in the country from
driving in the suburbs? "When you drive in the
country you're driving at higher speeds and also
overtaking." "Driving the country can be
more dangerous because the roads are
unsealed and there can be more hazards."
"When driving in the country you have to
look out for animals because they may jump out
in front of you."
You'll need to deal with driving at higher
speeds
cars overtaking you, possibility of animals
venturing onto the road
various weather conditions, dazzling
headlights, the remains of tyre blowouts
and potentially unfamiliar or dirt roads.
How do you feel about driving at high
speeds on country roads? "To become more
comfortable at driving at higher speeds
I practice when mum's in the car."
"I feel a bit uncomfortable about driving at high
speeds because it's easier to lose control of the car."
"Because I've only just started driving
I'm kind of nervous at driving at high speeds
but I reckon with practice I'll be alright."
Where the speed limits permit
start by driving at 80 kph, then after
some time start to increase your speed to 85,
to 90, to 95
to 100kph, the maximum speed that
a Learner can travel at.
If possible do this in multi-lane highways.
Be aware of the speed limit as you drive
through townships.
Generally you'll need to lower your speed
to 80, then 60 or 50 kph.
You can get used to traveling at high
speed so watch your speedo as you enter
these towns.
So here are some tips for
driving in the country. The last
thing you need to do is get stressed.
Allow plenty of time to get to your
destination
and allow extra time to for possible delays.
Be seen. It's a good idea when you're driving in
the country during the day to drive with
your headlights on low beam.
It makes you more visible to other vehicles.
Occasionally check your side mirrors to
make sure you're in the correct position
on the road,
fractionally left of the centre of your
side of the road. This will increase
the passing distance, called 'the buffer
zone' between your vehicle and oncoming
cars. When you're on a long trip
generally you should take a break every
two hours.
Fatigue is a common cause of serious
crashes. Use designated rest stops.
Most of the busy single lane roads
in South Australia
have overtaking lanes at regular
intervals. These are the safest places to
overtake
so sit well back from the slower vehicle
relax and wait for these overtaking lanes
to appear. On long journeys people can tend
to switch off.
This can be a fatal mistake. If you're
distracted or you lose concentration
then your car wanders off the road, your natural
reaction is to jerk the steering wheel in the
opposite direction. If your wheels leave the
bitumen ease off the accelerator and
don't brake harshly.
Hold the steering wheel firm with both
hands and ease the wheels back onto the road.
There's no time like the present to
take on all this advice and become more
confident driving in the country.